

*   *   *
Chapter 4


Phaeophytin and eumelanin, according to spectro. There are even hints of some kind of lead-based Keipper pigment, soaking up X-rays in the picometer range. Chimp hypothesizes something called a chromatophore: branching cells with little aliquots of pigment inside, like particles of charcoal dust. Keep those particles clumped together and the cell's effectively transparent; spread them out through the cytoplasm and the whole structure darkens, dims whatever EM passes through from behind. Apparently there were animals back on Earth with cells like that. They could change color, pattern-match to their background, all sorts of things. 

"So there's a membrane of— of living tissue around that star," I say, trying to wrap my head around the concept. "A, a meat balloon. Around the whole damn star."

"Yes," the chimp says.

"But that's— Jesus, how thick would it be?"

"No more than two millimeters. Probably less."

"How so?"

"If it was much thicker, it would be more obvious in the visible spectrum. It would have had a detectable effect on the von Neumanns when they hit it."

"That's assuming that its— cells, I guess— are like ours."

"The pigments are familiar; the rest might be too."

It can't be too familiar. Nothing like a conventional gene would last two seconds in that environment. Not to mention whatever miracle solvent that thing must use as antifreeze...

"Okay, let's be conservative, then. Say, mean thickness of a millimeter. Assume a density of water at STP. How much mass in the whole thing?"

"1.4 yottagrams," Dix and the chimp reply, almost in unison.

"That's, uh…"

"Half the mass of Mercury," the chimp adds helpfully.

I whistle through my teeth. "And that's one organism?"

"I don't know yet."

"It's got organic pigments. Fuck, it's talking. It's intelligent."

"Most cyclic emanations from living sources are simple biorhythms," the chimp points out. "Not intelligent signals."

I ignore it and turn to Dix. "Assume it's a signal."

He frowns. "Chimp says—"

"Assume. Use your imagination."

I'm not getting through to him. He looks nervous.

He looks like that a lot, I realize.

"If someone were signaling you," I say, "then what would you do?"

"Signal…" Confusion on that face, and a fuzzy circuit closing somewhere "…back?"

My son is an idiot.

"And if the incoming signal takes the form of systematic changes in light intensity, how—"

"Use the BI lasers, alternated to pulse between 700 and 3000 nanometers. Can boost an interlaced signal into the exawatt range without compromising our fenders; gives over a thousand Watts per square meter after diffraction. Way past detection threshold for anything that can sense thermal output from a red dwarf. And content doesn't matter if it's just a shout. Shout back. Test for echo."

Okay, so my son is an idiot savant.

And he still looks unhappy— "But Chimp, he says no real information there, right?" — and that whole other set of misgivings edges to the fore again: He. 

Dix takes my silence for amnesia. "Too simple, remember? Simple click train."

I shake my head. There's more information in that signal than the chimp can imagine. There are so many things the chimp doesn't know. And the last thing I need is for this, this child to start deferring to it, to start looking to it as an equal or, God forbid, a mentor.

Oh, it's smart enough to steer us between the stars. Smart enough to calculate million-digit primes in the blink of an eye. Even smart enough for a little crude improvisation should the crew go too far off-mission.

Not smart enough to know a distress call when it sees one. 

"It's a deceleration curve," I tell them both. "It keeps slowing down. Over and over again. That's the message."

Stop. Stop. Stop. Stop. 

And I think it's meant for no one but us.


